(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.) Welcome to Walking in His Footsteps, where we
explore how Jesus's teachings guide us through life's
big questions.
I'm Emma Thompson, and today we're tackling something
I've always wondered about.
What's the deal with Catholics and Protestants?
They're both Christian, but what makes them different?
Here to break it down is Dr. Michael
Carter, biblical scholar from St. Mary's University.
Dr. Carter, thanks for joining us.
Emma, it's a pleasure.
This is a great topic.
There's a lot of history here.
But yeah, it all ties back to following
Jesus.
Let's dive in.
At the core, what's the main difference between
Catholics and Protestants?
How did this split even happen?
Yeah, great question.
You really have to go back to the
1500s to what we call the Reformation.
That's when figures like Martin Luther started questioning,
challenging some practises of the Catholic Church at
the time.
But the absolute core issue, the real fundamental
thing was about authority.
Authority, how so?
Well, for Catholics, authority comes from two main
sources, you could say.
It's the Bible, and it's the church's tradition,
the teachings handed down over centuries.
And the Pope is seen as the main
guide and interpreter of that tradition, along with
the bishops.
So Bible plus tradition, guided by the Pope.
Exactly.
But then Protestants, coming out of the Reformation,
really emphasised sola scriptura.
Sola scriptura, Latin for?
Scripture alone.
The idea is that the Bible is the
only ultimate authority for faith and practise.
Now both absolutely believe in Jesus's teachings, right?
Like John 3.1's theme, for God so
loved the world.
That's central to both.
But how they determine the truth, where that
ultimate authority lies, that's the key split.
Okay.
So Catholics have the Pope and tradition, and
Protestants stick to the Bible, that's a big
one.
What's another key difference?
Maybe something about how they worship or believe?
Yeah, definitely.
Worship, and specifically sacraments, that's another major area
where you see a difference.
Like ritual.
Sort of, yeah.
Catholics see sacraments, and they recognise seven of
them, like baptism, Eucharist, confession, as actual channels
of God's grace, ways God directly gives grace
to people.
Seven, okay.
And the Eucharist, or communion, is really central.
They believe in the real presence.
Real presence.
Yeah, the belief that the bread and wine
during the mass actually become the body and
blood of Jesus.
It's not just symbolic for them.
Wow.
They point to verses like John 6, where
Jesus talks about eating his flesh and drinking
his blood.
Okay, unless you eat the flesh.
Got it.
So it's very literal, very profound for Catholics.
And Protestants, how do they see it?
Well, Protestants typically recognise just two sacraments, baptism
and communion, or the Lord's Supper.
Just two.
And communion is generally seen as symbolic.
It's a powerful remembrance of Jesus' sacrifice.
A remembrance?
Exactly.
Like when Jesus said in Luke 22, do
this in remembrance of me.
So the focus is more on the act
of remembering and proclaiming his death.
Got it.
So Catholics see the Eucharist as literally Jesus,
while Protestants see it as a symbol.
That's pretty different.
What about salvation?
I've heard people say Catholics and Protestants disagree
on how you get to heaven.
That's definitely another crucial distinction.
A really core theological difference that came out
of the Reformation.
So how does it break down?
Well, the Catholic understanding is often summarised as
salvation through faith and works.
Faith and works, meaning?
Meaning, yes, faith in Jesus is essential.
It's the foundation.
But living out that faith through good deeds,
acts of love and charity, those are also
seen as necessary, guided by God's grace, of
course.
Like in Matthew 25, Jesus says, whatever you
did for one of the least of these,
you did for me.
So those actions matter for salvation.
Hmm.
Okay.
So faith plus living it out through actions.
Right.
Guided by grace.
Now, Protestants, especially in the Reformation traditions, put
the emphasis on solified.
Faith alone.
Exactly.
The belief is that you're saved by God's
grace purely through trusting in Jesus Christ, not
by anything you do.
So works don't matter.
Well, it's not that they don't matter at
all.
They're seen more as the result or the
evidence of genuine faith rather than the means
of earning salvation.
Ah, I see the distinction.
Yeah.
Like Ephesians 2 says, by grace you have
been saved through faith, not by works.
It's a gift you receive through faith.
Okay.
So both agree salvation is rooted in Jesus's
death and resurrection.
Absolutely.
But they emphasise different aspects of how we,
you know, respond to that gift.
Faith and works versus faith alone.
That's helpful.
Is there anything else big we should know?
Maybe something practical that affects how people live
their faith?
Yeah, there is.
Another key difference is the role of Mary,
Jesus's mother, and the saints.
Okay.
Mary and the saints.
How does that differ?
Well, Catholics hold Mary in very high honour,
and they also venerate saints people recognised for
their holiness.
Venerate, meaning?
They honour them.
And crucially, they believe you can ask Mary
and the saints to pray for you to
God.
They see them as intercessors.
Like asking a friend to pray for you.
Kind of, yeah.
But on a heavenly level, they might point
to passages like in Revelation, where saints offer
prayers.
Okay.
So practically, you'll see Catholics praying the rosary,
for instance, which involves prayers to Mary.
I have a Catholic friend, Sophia, who finds
real peace in that, asking Mary to talk
to Jesus for her.
Interesting.
And the Protestant view?
Protestants generally focus prayer directly to God for
Jesus Christ.
Directly.
Yeah.
They emphasise Jesus as the one mediator between
God and humanity.
Okay.
That's based on verses like 1 Timothy 2
.5. There is one mediator, Christ Jesus.
Right.
So they typically don't pray to Mary or
the saints for intercession.
The focus is direct access to God through
Christ.
So less formal prayers, like the rosary maybe,
and more personal Bible study.
Often, yeah.
A big emphasis on that personal relationship and
direct communication.
My friend James, who's Protestant, really finds connection
just diving into scripture himself.
Gosh, yeah.
So again, you see different approaches, different practises,
but both are ultimately seeking connection with Jesus,
right?
That's such a clear way to see it.
Different paths, same heart for Jesus.
Dr. Carter, what's the takeaway for us, whether
we're Catholic, Protestant, or just curious?
You know, I think the biggest takeaway, the
overarching message, really has to be about unity
in Christ.
Unity.
Yeah.
Despite all these differences we've talked about, authority,
sacraments, salvation, Mary and the saints, differences that
are real and sometimes significant.
Both traditions share that fundamental belief in Jesus
Christ as Lord and Saviour.
That's the common ground.
Jesus himself prayed for his followers to be
one.
In John 17, he prays that they may
all be one.
So understanding these differences, it shouldn't be about
saying who's right or wrong, but more about
fostering respect and maybe learning from each other,
and ultimately just keeping Jesus at the centre,
loving like he called us to love.
That core faith is, I think, much stronger
than the things that divide.
Love that.
Dr. Michael Carter, thank you for making this
so clear and kind.
Listeners, if this sparked curiosity, talk to a
Catholic or Protestant friend, or check out the
Bible verses Dr. Carter mentioned, share this episode,
and join us next time for more on
walking with Jesus.
Until then, keep walking in his footsteps.